Now let's do a quick recap.
We just covered the physical tools, ICU on the left,
and now let's cover the more electronic tools on the right,
what I call the 1s and 0s.
Okay, let's get started.
Status reports are one of your most important communication tools.
So, why send status reports?
Okay,
the intent and reason for status reports is to inform your customer
and stakeholder on the progress of the project.
Remember the progress of the project is measured by your
key performance indicators we discussed in the project
control portion of this module.
Some examples may be milestones, budgets, schedules, etc.
The lack of a project status report is usually interpreted as either
something's wrong or you don't know what's going on.
You do not want that impression of you or your project.
In fact,
your consistent status reports following the five Cs will support a positive,
professional perception of you by your stakeholders and customers.
Okay, always status your customers consistently and regularly.
Never miss one.
Also, status your team.
You may use informal emails or informal meetings,
stand ups, things like that, walk-arounds,
and also they'll be very consistent.
And status your management.
Remember you work for someone.
Be consistent, again.
I suggest also copying your management on all status reports
going to your stakeholders or customers.
He or she will also see the progress and quality of your work.
That's important.
And lastly, again, always follow the five Cs.
Okay, now let's check out emails as the next important tool.
Emails are probably the most common way to communicate in business.
Phones, of course, are also very important and very common as well,
but emails seem to predominate the world today.
So to make your life more simple, come up with templates that you can use.
So maybe you lay out an email for a customer and then
just reuse it for your weekly updates, for example.
The same approach may apply for each project too.
You may have a template per project or a template per customer,
and whatever works for you and maybe you'll apply to
other projects and customers as well.
Now in an email, the TO portion is for the intended audience.
Those are the people who must read it.
Those are the people you want to really read it.
Do not put every Tom, Dick, and Harry here,
only the people that must absolutely need to read it.
Then there's the CC.
I don't know if you remember or not, but CC stood for Carbon Copy.
It is for the optional audience, and remember,
don't expect this list to actually read your email.
You are sending it as an FYI or out of courtesy.
If you really want someone to read it, put their email address in the TO portion,
the targeted audience.
Okay, the subject.
Most people haven't a clue what to put here.
Of all the five Cs, I strongly recommend compelling is the one should follow.
Something short and something that will entice them to read your email,
no fuzzy subjects please.
And lastly, the body.
After you write your email, quickly glance over it to make sure,
is it clear, is it concise, is it courteous,
is it consistent, and is it compelling?
Just those five easy steps for each email and you will greatly
improve the impact of your emails immediately.
And remember,
with the emails you are not in the room with them reading it right
next to them filling in the blanks so to speak,
so you must communicate well,
so they can clearly understand what you intend to say and get your message,
and that is best done by following the five Cs.
So let's first talk about the good reasons why we want
to use the telephone or the phone,
and then secondly we're going to talk about the not-so-good reasons.
Okay, first the good reasons.
Urgency.
Because phones provide instant communication,
nothing beats a phone for getting someone's attention.
Short of walking up to someone's desk,
phones are the most urgent form of communication out there,
so use it accordingly.
Also, in building relationships.
Because they use voice and social cues,
phones allow people to convey personality,
that makes them the best way to strengthen the business relationship.
Conversations can get interesting, personal, and informative in seconds.
All it takes is a deep breath, a sigh,
or some other non-verbal audio cue for you to realize how
to course correct your conversation.
Gleaning non-public information or private information, personal information.
Because phone conversations are usually unrecorded,
they encourage people to open up on issues with your projects
that people may otherwise shy away from,
so you can often learn more from asking a question on a call than
you can by asking the same question in email.
Addressing sensitive topics.
Because of a phone's privacy and the ability to convey a human voice is
the tool of choice for addressing sensitive topics,
phone conversations give the caller an opportunity to ask questions,
explore possibilities, and brainstorm instantaneously with others.
Next is herding kittens.
While conference calls may go astray,
they are still the best way to get several people in remote
offices and locations on the same page.
Unlike emails, which could be easily misinterpreted in large audiences,
conference calls force everyone to speak to and
hear each other in a single space.
Making a critical point.
Because you usually need to force someone to listen to you until
they recognize the benefit of your discussion,
phone calls are by far more effective than emails.
An email, on the other hand,
is likely to end up maybe in an unanswered spam folder.
Okay, now next on the right are the don'ts about using the phone.
Here's where you just don't want to use a phone,
and I don't think it's very effective and could be dangerous for your project.
Okay first, never use to introduce a new process.
Phone calls are largely a verbal, unrecorded form of communication,
so if you're explaining a step-by-step concept,
for example,
put it in an email first so that the reader can follow you
along as you explain it on the phone.
No point in taking time on the phone and just assuming
that they are taking really good notes.
On a cold call.
If you're putting in a call to your boss or a client and you
have no clue about the other person's schedule,
that's not good, so start by scheduling a call via email.
Phone calls are considered very disruptive
sometimes given their immediate nature.
It's best to keep that level of interruption maybe for
emergencies and things like that, but if possible,
try to pre-plan your phone calls.
Never in a loud or public space.
That is so distracting.
Whether you're in a bathroom, or maybe the train,
or a restaurant,
be aware of background noise or other people when
talking or making a business call.
It can tell the other party a lot about how much importance and
focus you're putting on what you have to say.
Try to always be in an office or if you have to be in your car,
maybe the doors are shut and it's more quiet.
And again, it depends on your audience and who you're talking to.
If it's a friend or a great relationship in a project,
that's fine, but if you're calling someone really important or a stakeholder,
give them the respect and attention they deserve.
Conveying brief instructions.
When you need to quickly convey a succinct concept or instruction,
the phone is usually not the best idea.
Your action items won't be recorded,
you won't know if the person missed what you said,
or maybe they were talking to someone else while you
were talking to them on the phone,
maybe there's some just some chitchat going on,
so stick to emails for assigning tasks.
Never for a 100-person conference call.
Conference calls are great in concept,
but there is a limit to their effectiveness.
Having a group too large on the line will ensure that they'll
become distracted by the end of the call.
Alright, let's move on to more of a what I might call controversial methods.
Here are some other methods I'd like to discuss,
instant messaging, social media,
and texting in the context of project management.
Instant messaging is a real-time text transmission over the internet,
such products as Microsoft Lync or IBM Lotus Sametime,
Yahoo!
Messenger, and many, many others,
they can be very handy in meetings to get real-time
updates of project information.
Some companies may not want employees using personal IM applications,
so find out what works in your company.
Your IM app should be behind a firewall as well for content privacy.
The ideal enterprise message should have a corporate identity,
an audit trail, administrative control, etc.
over your IM implementation.
Next is social media such as FaceTime, and Twitter, and LinkedIn.
You know, I'm just not a fan of Facebook for this context.
They do have groups and messages and maybe those might work.
Twitter,
well there are few companies who are using Twitter for internal
communications behind protected accounts.
And with LinkedIn,
there's the groups feature where you can actually create your
own virtual internet for employees or partner.
Next, just texting.
Again, not a fan.
I think it's best to use for just one-to-one communication,
maybe minor types of communication, for example,
hey, I'm late for a meeting, or here's the email address I promised you.
Texts typically totally violate the five Cs completely.
So in summary,
I am a fan of instant messaging and I believe it is
very useful at times for projects, but in the social media and the texting side,
I'm just not a fan.
Now I'm not trying to sway you certainly.
Give anything a try and always think out of the box.
I just haven't seen any useful applications of these two other methods for project management.